---
title: "v0.6.3 - Security fixes and style improvements"
linkTitle: "v0.6.3"
date: 2019-04-22
description: >
  Security fixes and style improvements
---

## Github

[Github Release](https://github.com/natlas/natlas/releases/tag/v0.6.3)

### Added

* Normal users can now be added with the add-admin.py bootstrap script

### Changed

* SECURITY - Invite and Password Reset tokens have moved from using JWT to database-backed stateful tokens. These tokens expire after a defined period of time, as well as if the token is successfully used.
* Various styling improvements for authentication pages

### Fixed

* SECURITY - Invite and Password Reset flows have been updated to include an intermediary step that prevents the secret tokens from leaking to 3rd parties via the Referer header.
* SECURITY - Email validation is much stricter now, through the use of python-email-validator. This fixes problems where emails like `test@test.com@test.com` or `test @test.com` could have been treated as valid emails, causing unexpected behaviors.
* New users are explicitly created with "is_admin" set to false, instead of the previous "None" that they would get in certain flows.
* The nginx deployment script now correctly recommends placing all logs in the same folder, instead of `/var/log/nginx/natlas` and `/var/log/nginx/natlas.io`.
* Fixed erroneous help string in search help modal that was a holdover from v0.5.x.

### Removed

* Removed an unused css load from adobe for the NATLAS logo font. We previously settled on using the image, but had forgotten to remove the font stylesheet include.
